# Why Go?

* could've used any systems languages
* particular convenient features - threads, locks, synchronization
* convenient RPC package
* type and memory safe
  * hard to scribble over random memory
  * garbage collected
* freeing object that's shared by threads is hard, so GC is great
* simple

# Threads

* main tool for concurrency
* called `goroutines` in Go
* 1 program with singular addrspace
  * serial program has 1 thread of execution
    * 1 stack, set of registers, pc, etc..
  * multithreaded program has separate thread of execution
    * each has stack, registers, pc, etc..
    * shared heap

## Why threads?

* (I/O) concurrency
  * our context - launch many RPCs, wait for lots of responses from servers
* parallelism
  * threads can run truly in parallel on multicore machine
* convenience
  * e.g. master wants to periodically check workers are alive, doing this in a thread is easy

### Questions

* what happens if we don't have threads?
  * can do asynchronous/event-driven programming
  * single thread, single loop
    * waits for input/event
    * table of state and stuff, can check for each client
    * threads are generally more easy to do
    * don't get true parallelism
    * lower overhead than threads though
* threads vs processes
  * processes each have an addrspace
    * all very segregated, don't talk to each other (generally)
* when a context switch happens, does it happen for all threads?
  * threads that we use are based on OS provided threads
  * OS switches between threads that it knows about
  * OS will switch threads and do a big context-switch
  * Go is also smart and throws multiple goroutines into a single OS thread, so Go has a scheduler too

## Challenges

* what to do about shared memory? very easy to get bugs

* classic example of a race condition

```c++
n += 1;
```

  * some other thread may be modifying data at the same time

    * e.g. two threads are trying to increment 10 -> 11, the final result may only be 11 instead of 12
      * LD addr r0
      * ADD 1 r0
      * ST r0 addr
    * *note: not all assembly instructions are atomic*

  * can solve this example using locks (mutex) or not sharing the data

* coordination - want threads to interact and maybe wait for each other

  * channels
  * CVs (sync.Cond)
  * waitGroup

* deadlock

  * e.g. T1 waiting for T2, but T2 waiting for T1. nothing will happen

### Questions

* should you keep locks as private parts of data structure?
  * can be reasonable, but has drawbacks
    * don't want to pay overhead for totally synchronous DS
    * if you use multiple DS like that
      * could cause deadlocks
      * could not even provide the right guarantees (imo)

# Web Crawler example

* [crawler.go](http://nil.csail.mit.edu/6.824/2020/notes/crawler.go)
* want to avoid cycles, want to avoid fetching a page twice, want to know when we're done
* serial crawler
  * DFS, keeps a map called "fetched"
* mutex implementation
  * DFS, shared table, and a mutex data structure
    * DS has a lock and a fetched map
    * also needs to use waitgroup to wait for children to finish
  * pro-tip: go run -race \<file\>
    * tries to detect race conditions
* channel implementation
  * 1 master thread, spawns a worker for every url received in the channel that hasn't been fetched yet
  * master keeps a count of \# of outstanding workers, quits when it hits 0

---


> Lecture ends here, rest was covered in a tutorial not on youtube. Notes are from the website

* When to use sharing and locks, versus channels?
  * Most problems can be solved in either style
  * What makes the most sense depends on how the programmer thinks
    * state -- sharing and locks
    * communication -- channels
  * For the 6.824 labs, I recommend sharing+locks for state,
    * and sync.Cond or channels or time.Sleep() for waiting/notification.

# Remote Procedure Call (RPC)
  * a key piece of distributed system machinery; all the labs use RPC
  * **goal**: easy-to-program client/server communication
  * hide details of network protocols
  * convert data (strings, arrays, maps, etc..) to "wire format"

## RPC message diagram:

```
  Client             Server
    request--->
       <---response
```

## Software structure

```
  client app        handler fns
   stub fns         dispatcher
   RPC lib           RPC lib
     net  ------------ net
```

# Key Value Store example

* [kv.go](http://nil.csail.mit.edu/6.824/2020/notes/kv.go)
* A toy key/value storage server -- Put(key,value), Get(key)->value
* Uses Go's RPC library
* Common:
  * Declare Args and Reply struct for each server handler.
* Client:
  * connect()'s Dial() creates a TCP connection to the server
  * get() and put() are client "stubs"
  * Call() asks the RPC library to perform the call
    * you specify server function name, arguments, place to put reply
    * library marshalls args, sends request, waits, unmarshalls reply
    * return value from Call() indicates whether it got a reply
    * usually you'll also have a reply.Err indicating service-level failure
* Server:
  * Go requires server to declare an object with methods as RPC handlers
  * Server then registers that object with the RPC library
  * Server accepts TCP connections, gives them to RPC library
  * The RPC library
    * reads each request
    * creates a new goroutine for this request
    * unmarshalls request
    * looks up the named object (in table create by Register())
    * calls the object's named method (dispatch)
    * marshalls reply
    * writes reply on TCP connection
  * The server's Get() and Put() handlers
    * Must lock, since RPC library creates a new goroutine for each request
    * read args; modify reply

## Notes
* Binding: how does client know what server computer to talk to?
  * For Go's RPC, server name/port is an argument to Dial
  * Big systems have some kind of name or configuration server
* Marshalling: format data into packets
  * Go's RPC library can pass strings, arrays, objects, maps, &c
  * Go passes pointers by copying the pointed-to data
  * Cannot pass channels or functions

## Failures 

* RPC problem: what to do about failures?
  * e.g. lost packet, broken network, slow server, crashed server
* What does a failure look like to the client RPC library?
  * Client never sees a response from the server
  * Client does *not* know if the server saw the request!
    * Maybe server never saw the request
    * Maybe server executed, crashed just before sending reply
    * Maybe server executed, but network died just before delivering reply
* Simplest failure-handling scheme: "best effort"
  * Call() waits for response for a while
  * If none arrives, re-send the request
  * Do this a few times
  * Then give up and return an error

### Questions

* is "best effort" easy for applications to cope with?
  * A particularly bad situation:
    * client executes
      * Put("k", 10);
      * Put("k", 20);
    * both succeed
    * what will Get("k") yield?
    * [diagram, timeout, re-send, original arrives late]
* best effort ever OK?
  * read-only operations
  * operations that do nothing if repeated
    * e.g. DB checks if record has already been inserted

## At most once
* idea: server RPC code detects duplicate requests
  * returns previous reply instead of re-running handler
* Q: how to detect a duplicate request?
* client includes unique ID (XID) with each request
  * uses same XID for re-send
* server:
  * if seen[xid]:
    * r = old[xid]
  * else
    * r = handler()
    * old[xid] = r
    * seen[xid] = true

### Complexity
* this will come up in lab 3
* what if two clients use the same XID?
  * big random number?
  * combine unique client ID (ip address?) with sequence #?
* server must eventually discard info about old RPCs
  * when is discard safe?
  * idea:
    * each client has a unique ID (perhaps a big random number)
    * per-client RPC sequence numbers
    * client includes "seen all replies <= X" with every RPC
    * much like TCP sequence #s and acks
  * or only allow client one outstanding RPC at a time
    * arrival of seq+1 allows server to discard all <= seq
* how to handle dup req while original is still executing?
  * server doesn't know reply yet
  * idea: "pending" flag per executing RPC; wait or ignore

### Failure
* What if an at-most-once server crashes and re-starts?
* if at-most-once duplicate info in memory, server will forget
  * and accept duplicate requests after re-start
* maybe it should write the duplicate info to disk
* maybe replica server should also replicate duplicate info

### Go RPC
* Go RPC is a simple form of "at-most-once"
  * open TCP connection
  * write request to TCP connection
  * Go RPC never re-sends a request
    * So server won't see duplicate requests
  * Go RPC code returns an error if it doesn't get a reply
    * perhaps after a timeout (from TCP)
    * perhaps server didn't see request
    * perhaps server processed request but server/net failed before reply came back
* What about "exactly once"?
  * unbounded retries plus duplicate detection plus fault-tolerant service
  * Lab 3